## Foreword
The Task force for the Validation and Transformation Language (VTL), created in 2012-2013 under the initiative of the SDMX Secretariat, is pleased to present the draft version of VTL 1.1.
The SDMX Secretariat launched the VTL work at the end of 2012, moving on from the consideration that SDMX already had a package for transformations and expressions in its information model, while a specific implementation language was missing. To make this framework operational, a standard language for defining validation and transformation rules (operators, their syntax and semantics) had to be adopted, while appropriate SDMX formats for storing and exchanging rules, and web services to retrieve them, had to be designed. The present VTL 1.1 package is only concerned with the first element, i.e. a formal definition of each operator, together with a general description of VTL, its core assumptions and the information model it is based on.
The VTL task force was set up early in 2013, composed of members of SDMX, DDI and GSIM communities and the work started in summer 2013. The intention was to provide a language usable by statisticians to express logical validation rules and transformations on data, whether described as dimensional tables or as unit-record data. The assumption is that this logical formalization of validation and transformation rules could be converted into specific programming languages for execution (SAS, R, Java, SQL, etc.) but would provide a “neutral” expression at business level of the processing taking place, against which various implementations can be mapped. Experience with existing examples suggests that this goal would be attainable.
An important point that emerged is that several standards are interested in such a language. However, each standard operates on its model artefacts and produces artefacts within the same model (property of closure). To cope with this, VTL has been built upon a very basic information model (VTL IM), taking the common parts of GSIM, SDMX and DDI, mainly using artefacts from GSIM 1.1, somewhat simplified and with some additional detail. This way, existing standards (GSIM, SDMX, DDI, others) may adopt VTL by mapping their information model against the VTL IM. Therefore, although a work-product of SDMX, the VTL language in itself is independent of SDMX and will be usable with other standards as well. Thanks to the possibility of being mapped with the basic part of the IM of other standards, the VTL IM also makes it possible to collect and manage the basic definitions of data represented in different standards.
For the reason described above, The VTL specifications are designed at a logical level, independently of any other standard, including SDMX. The VTL specifications, therefore, are self-standing and can be implemented either on their own or by other standards (including SDMX). In particular, the work for the SDMX implementation of VTL is going in parallel to the work for designing the VTL 1.1 version, and will entail a future update of the SDMX documentation.
The first public consultation on VTL (version 1.0) was held in 2014. Many comments were incorporated in the VTL 1.0 version, published in March 2015. Other suggestions for improving the language, received afterwards, fed the discussion for building the present draft 1.1 version, which contains many new features. The VTL 1.1 package, containing the general VTL specifications independent of other standards possible implementations, will include, in its final release:1. Part 1 – the user manual, highlighting the main characteristics of VTL, its core assumptions and the information model the language is based on;2.	Part 2 – the reference manual, containing the full library of operators ordered by category, including examples; this version will support more validation and compilation needs compared to VTL 1.0.  3.	eBNF notation (extended Backus-Naur Form) which is the technical notation to be used as a test bed for all the examples. The present document (part 2) contains the reference manual with the full library of operators ordered by category.  The latest version of VTL is freely available online at [https://sdmx.org](https://sdmx.org).

### Acknowledgements The VTL specifications have been prepared thanks to the collective input of experts from Bank of Italy, Bank for International Settlements (BIS), European Central Bank (ECB), Eurostat, ILO, INEGI-Mexico, ISTAT-Italy, OECD, Statistics Netherlands, and UNESCO. Other experts from the SDMX Technical Working Group, the SDMX Statistical Working Group and the DDI initiative were consulted and participated in reviewing the documentation.
The list of contributors and reviewers includes the following experts: Sami Airo, Foteini Andrikopoulou, David Barraclough, Luigi Bellomarini, Marc Bouffard, Maurizio Capaccioli, Vincenzo Del Vecchio, Fabio Di Giovanni, Jens Dossé, Heinrich Ehrmann, Bryan Fitzpatrick, Tjalling Gelsema, Luca Gramaglia, Arofan Gregory, Gyorgy Gyomai, Edgardo Greising, Dragan Ivanovic, Angelo Linardi, Juan Munoz, Chris Nelson, Stratos Nikoloutsos, Marco Pellegrino, Michele Romanelli, Juan Alberto Sanchez, Roberto Sannino, Angel Simon Delgado, Daniel Suranyi, Olav ten Bosch, Laura Vignola, Fernando Wagener and Nikolaos Zisimos.
Feedback and suggestions for improvement are encouraged and should be sent to the SDMX Technical Working Group [twg@sdmx.org](mailto:twg@sdmx.org).