## Introduction
The VTL 1.1 library of the Operators is described hereinafter. The operators included in this version of VTL are summarized in the diagrams and tables below. VTL 1.1 is made of two main parts: the VTL Definition Language (VTL-DL) and the VTL Manipulation Language (VTL-ML).
The former (VTL-DL) did not exist in VTL 1.0, because at that time VTL was intended to work on top of existing standards, like SDMX, DDI, GSIM or others, and therefore the definition of the artefacts to be manipulated (Data and their structures, Variables, Value Domains and so on) was assumed to be made using the implementing standards and not VTL itself. In other words, VTL 1.0 was not meant to define its artefacts and therefore only contained a manipulation language.
During the work for VTL 1.1, it was acknowledged as very recommendable and useful to have a complete definition language, able to define all the artefacts that VTL can manipulate. This is, first, to express structural and reusable definitions directly in VTL (even independently of other standards); second, to facilitate the use of VTL on top of other standards (through a proper mapping, the structural definitions of the other standards could be translated in VTL definitions and vice-versa); third, to make it possible to check at parsing time the coherency of the VTL manipulation expressions against the structure of the artefacts to be manipulated (even defined through VTL).
Therefore, VTL 1.1 has been equipped also with a definition language for VTL artefacts.
As for the manipulation language, VTL 1.0 contains a flat list of operators, in principle not related one another. A main suggestion for VTL 1.1 was to identify a core set of primitive operators able to express all the other operators of the language. This is in order to specify more formally the semantics of the available operators, avoiding possible ambiguities about their behaviour and fostering coherent implementations.  The distinction between the core and standard library is mainly of interest of the VTL technical implementers.
The suggestion above has been acknowledged, so that the VTL 1.1 manipulation language is made of a core set of primitive operators and a standard library of derived operators, definable in term of the primitive ones. The standard library contains VTL 1.0 operators (possibly enhanced) and the new operators introduced in VTL 1.1.
The VTL core includes a mechanism called FLWOR expressions (For-Let-Where-Order-Return), which allows to define derived operators and their behaviour, including custom operators (not existing in the standard library) for specific purposes.
