## Structure of the document
This manual describes in detail the operators of VTL 1.1 and is organized as follows.
In this chapter, the following paragraph (Diagrams of the Operators) summarize all the available operators (for the VTL-DL, VTL-ML - Core Operators, VTL-ML – Standard Library) through a diagram. Then, in the paragraph "List of the Operators/Functions", two corresponding lists are given, specifying for each operator some basic information. In "Evaluation Order", the precedence rules for evaluation of the VTL-ML operators are described. Finally, the "Syntactical conventions" section illustrates the meta-syntax used in the other chapters for describing formally the syntax of the operators.
The remainder of the document is structured in chapters, each one dedicated to the description of a category of Operators. For each Operator there is a specific section explaining the syntax, the semantics and giving some examples. Each of these sections has the following structure:
* **Semantics**: an informal extract of the behaviour;
* **Syntax**: a specification of the complete syntax of the operator at hand. It is expressed in terms of the types of the Core (cfr. part 1) by means of a specific meta-syntax;
* **Parameters**: the input parameters, described in detail, with respect to the types of the Core;
* **Returns**: the output parameters, described in detail, with respect to the types of the Core;
* **Constraints**: semantic constraints and syntactical constraints that cannot be specified with the meta-syntax but need a textual explanation; sometimes for the sake of clarity, even syntactical constraints are also repeated.
* **Semantic specification**: an extensive explanation of the behaviour of the operator in terms of the syntactical elements described in the sections Syntax, Parameters and Returns. Sometimes, when particularly complex, specific constraints are explained also in this section.
* **Examples**: a series of examples proving the behaviour of the operator.The last chapter illustrates the use case of a real questionnaire and the possible use of VTL for defining validation rules.