## List of the Operators/Functions
The following tables lists the VTL Operators and describes their main characteristics. The tables are relevant to the VTL-DL and the VTL-ML Standard Library. The operators of the Standard Library are ordered by category except for the clauses, which are the operators having a postfix syntax, that are shown all together in the end.

The VTL-ML Standard Library includes operators that may act on both Data Set and on Structure Components of the Data Sets. The last column shows if the Operator acts on Dataset, Components or both, when meaningful. The Component version takes as input and returns in output Component expressions. They are part of the syntax of other operators or clauses, where specifically required for row-wise processing.

### VTL-DL Operators
Operator/Functions|Category|Syntax|Description|Operand Data Sets|Component version 
:---|:----|:-:|:-----|:-:|:-:
defineValueDomain|Information Model artefacts definition|Functional|defines a ValueDomain in VTL information model.|-|-
defineValueDomainSubset|Information Model artefacts definition|Functional|defines a ValueDomainSubset in VTL information model|-|-
Define Variable|Information Model artefacts definition|Functional|defines a persistent Variable in the VTL information model|-|-
defineDataStructure|Information Model artefacts definition|Functional|defines a persistent DataStructure in the information model|-|-
defineDataset|Information Model artefacts definition|Functional|defines a persistent Dataset in the information model|-|-
define datapoint ruleset|Ruleset|Functional|defines a persistent object that contains Rules to be applied to the Data Points|-|-
define hierarchical ruleset |Ruleset|Functional|defines a persistent object that contains Rules to be applied to the code items of a Dataset component.|-|-
define mapping|Ruleset|Functional|defines a persistent object that contains Rules to be applied to recode codes of a component in a Dataset|-|-

### VTL-ML Standard Library
#### Operators and functions applied on Datasets and scalar values
Most of the single data points operators and functions can be applied to both Datasets and scalar values. The operands of the operators and functions can take the following forms:

* Scalar expression, e.g. 1+2.
* Dataset expression, with a single measure or attribute selected using the membership operator ".", e.g. ds_bop.obs_value. In this case the operator or function is applied to the specified measure or attribute.
* Dataset expression, with no measure or attribute selected, e.g. ds_bop. In this case the operator or function is applied to all measures of the Dataset having the data type accepted by the operator.

When a VTL operator or function is applied to two or more Datasets then at least an Identifier Component must appear in all Datasets with the same name and data type. In this case the function is applied on the measures having the same name and data type (accepted by the operator) and for the matching data points, i.e., the data points that have the same values of the common Identifier Components.

Assuming that _f_ is a VTL function or operator, _ds_, _ds1_ and _ds2_ are Datasets and _c_ is a scalar value (constant), the following table shows the VTL rules in the case of binary operators or functions:

Case|Result|Computation rule|Examples
---|---|---|---
*f*(*c*,*c*)|A scalar value|*f* is applied to the scalar operands|1 + 1<br/>round ( 10.52, 1)<br/>"abc" || "cde"\
*f*(*ds*,*c*)|A Dataset having the same components Identifiers and Attributes Components) of *ds*. The Measure Components returned are only those having data type accepted by the operator. The other Measures will be discarded.|*f* is applied to all measures of ds having data type accepted by the operator.<br/>*f* is applied to all data points of *ds*.<br/>The cardinality of the resulting Dataset (number of data points) is the same of *ds*.|*ds* + 1<br/>round ( *ds*, 1 )
*f*(*ds1*,*ds2*)|A Dataset having all the Identifier Components (without duplicates) and the common measures of *ds1* and *ds2* having data type accepted by the operator. The other Measures will be discarded.<br/>The attributes of *ds1* and *ds2* are ignored (do not appear in the resulting Dataset).|*f* is applied to the common numeric measures of ds1 and ds2.<br/>*f* is applied to all matching data points of *ds1* and *ds2* (those having the same values of the common Identifier Components) and to the Measures having data type accepted by the operator.<br/>The cardinality of the resulting Dataset (number of data points) is the number of matching data points.|*ds1* + *ds2*<br/>mod(*ds1*,*ds2*)
f ( ds.m , c )|A Dataset having all the Identifier Components of ds, the specified Measure Component m and the Attribute Components of ds.|f is applied to the specified Measure Components of ds.<br/>f is applied to all data points of ds.<br/>The cardinality of the resulting Dataset (number of data points) is the same of ds.|round ( ds.obs\_value, 1)<br/>ds.obs\_comment \|\| "."
f ( ds1.m1 , ds2.m1 )|A Dataset having all the  Identifier Components (without duplicates) of ds1 and ds2, and the Measure Component m1. The same Measure must be selected in both Datasets.<br/>The Attributes of ds1 and ds2, and the other Measures (if any), are ignored (do not appear in the resulting Dataset).|f is applied to the specified Measure of ds, or to the common measures of ds.<br/>f is applied to all matching data points of ds1 and ds2 (those having the same values of the common Identifier Components).<br/>The cardinality of the resulting Dataset (number of data points) is the number of matching data points.|ds1 + ds2<br/>mod ( ds1.obs\_value, ds2.obs\_value)

To apply the function *f* to measures having different names (in different Datasets) is possible using the operator as, e.g.:

`ds1.obs_value + (ds2.obsval as obs_value)`

A Dataset contains a set of data points. A data point (statistical observation) can be thought of as a row in a relational table or as a cell in a hypercube.

Scalars are also supported. As we will show, many operators allow for a kind of hybrid combination, involving Datasets and scalars. In this case the scalar value is combined (according to the semantics of the operator at hand) with all the Data Points in the Dataset, and in particular with the respective values of the Measure Component.

For example:

`ds2 := ds1 + 1`

produces a Dataset ds2 with the same structure as ds1, where the constant numeric value 1 has been added to the value of the Measure Component of every single Data Point in ds1. Seen in another perspective, with this behavior, we propose a kind of implicit "promotion" of a scalar value into a somehow special Dataset, with one single Data Point, having one Measure Component (with the constant value) and with no Identifier Components. 

In such a case, this single Data Point will match with all the Data Points of the involved Data Set as a limit but straightforward case, since, indeed, there are no Identifier Components to be matched at all.

### List of standard library operators and functions
Operator/<br/>|Category|Syntax|Description
:---:|---|---|---
Round parenthesis ()|General purpose|Functional|Specifies the evaluation precedence
assignment<br/>:=|General purpose|Infix|Assigns an Expression to a model artefact
Membership<br/>.|General purpose|Infix|Identifies a Component within a Data Set
Alias<br/>as|General purpose|Infix|Define an alias for a component or for the result of an expression
alterDataset|General purpose|Functional|Modify the Dataset with all or a subset of input components having only the Identifier role
get|General Purpose|Functional|Retrieves a Data Set
put|General Purpose|Functional|Stores a Data Set
eval|General Purpose|Functional|Evaluates an external routine
join expression|General Purpose|Functional|Implements the FLWOR<br/>expression
Function creation|General Purpose|Functional|Creates a function
### VTL-ML - Evaluation order of the Operators
Within a single expression of the manipulation language, the operators are applied in sequence, according to the precedence order. Operators with the same precedence level are applied according to associativity rules.  Precedence and associativity orders are reported in the following table.

|Order|Operator|Description|Associativity|
|:-:|:----:|:---------|:----:|
|I|()|Round parenthesis. To alter the default order.|Left-to-right|
|II|All VTL functional operators|The majority of the operators of the VTL|Left-to-right|
|III|Clauses and membership||Left-to-right|
|IV|unary plus<br/> unary minus<br/> not|Unary minus<br/> Unary plus<br/> Logical negation|Right-to-left|
|V|*<br/> /|Multiplication<br/> Division|Left-to-right|
|VI|+<br/> -|Addition<br/> Subtraction|Left-to-right|
|VII|> >=<br/> < <=<br/> in, not in<br/> between|Greater than<br/> Less than<br/> In (not in) a value list<br/> In a range|Left-to-right|
|VIII|exists\_in<br/> not\_exists\_in<br/> exists\_in\_all<br/> not\_exists\_in\_all|Identifiers matching|Left-to-right|
|IX|=<br/> <>|Equal-to<br/> Not-equal-to|Left-to-right|
|X|and|Logical AND|Left-to-right|
|XI|or<br/> xor|Logical XOR|Left-to-right|
|XII|if-then-else|Conditional (if-then-else)|Right-to-left|
|XIII|:=|Assignment|Right-to-left|
